>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, JANUARY 25:
A CRITICAL ELECTION IN GREECE.
PARLIAMENTARY VOTING THAT COULD
HAVE MAJOR IMPLICATIONS FOR ALL
OF EUROPE AND FOR MARKETS AROUND
THE WORLD.
A TOP HEALTH OFFICIAL EXPLAINS
WHAT'S BEHIND THE GROWING
OUTBREAK OF MEASLES IN THE U.S.
AND WHAT CAN BE DONE TO STOP IT.
AND AS PRESIDENT OBAMA'S VISIT
TO INDIA CONTINUES, WE'LL LOOK
AT THAT NATION'S PLAN TO
MODERNIZE ITS ECONOMY.
WILL HUNDREDS OF MILLIONS OF
POOR PEOPLE THERE BENEFIT OR BE
LEFT BEHIND?
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
IN AN ELECTION BEING WATCHED
CLOSELY THROUGHOUT EUROPE AND
AROUND THE WORLD, GREECE'S LEFT-
WING, ANTI-AUSTERITY PARTY TODAY
WON A DECISIVE VICTORY OVER THE
RULING CENTER-RIGHT PARTY.
THAT MEANS ALEXIS TSIPRAS IS ALL
BUT CERTAIN TO BECOME THE NEXT
PRIME MINISTER.
TSIPRAS HAS PLEDGED TO TRY TO
FORCE GREECE'S CREDITORS,
INCLUDING GERMANY, TO
RENEGOTIATE THE TERMS OF THE 270
BILLION DOLLAR BAILOUT PACKAGE
PUT TOGETHER AFTER THE 2008
GREAT RECESSION TO HELP GREECE
STAVE OFF ECONOMIC COLLAPSE.
BUT IN THE YEARS SINCE, GREECE'S
ECONOMY HAS SHRUNK BY 25 PERCENT
AND ABOUT A THIRD OF THE
CITIZENS THERE NOW LIVE AT OR
BELOW THE POVERTY LINE.
WE'LL HAVE MORE ABOUT WHAT
TODAY'S ELECTION RESULTS MIGHT
MEAN FOR GREECE, THE REST OF
EUROPE AND INTERNATIONAL MARKETS
RIGHT AFTER THE NEWS SUMMARY.
PRESIDENT OBAMA IS IN INDIA ON
AN OFFICIAL VISIT, AND AFTER
HOURS OF TALKS WITH PRIME
MINISTER NARENDRA MODI, THE
PRESIDENT SAID THE TWO LEADERS
HAD REACHED WHAT HE CALLED "A
BREAKTHROUGH UNDERSTANDING" THAT
WOULD MAKE IT POSSIBLE FOR
AMERICAN FIRMS TO BUILD NUCLEAR
REACTORS IN INDIA.
THE TWO COUNTRIES ALSO RENEWED A
DEFENSE PACT AND HAILED AN
AGREEMENT TO JOINTLY PRODUCE NEW
DEFENSE TECHNOLOGY.
BUT TALKS ON CLIMATE CHANGE
REPORTEDLY YIELDED ONLY MINOR
PROGRESS.
WHILE IN INDIA, THE PRESIDENT
BLAMED RUSSIA FOR RENEWED
VIOLENCE IN EASTERN UKRAINE AND
WARNED THAT THE UNITED STATES
WOULD, IN HIS WORDS, RATCHET UP
THE PRESSURE" ON THE KREMLIN.
THE PRESIDENT SAID HE WOULD
EXPLORE ADDITIONAL OPTIONS,
SHORT OF MILITARY CONFRONTATION.
PRO-RUSSIAN REBELS ANNOUNCED A
NEW OFFENSIVE THIS WEEK AND ARE
SAID TO BE RESPONSIBLE FOR
SHELLING THAT KILLED 30
CIVILIANS YESTERDAY.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
HAS ARRIVED IN NIGERIA, AND
TODAY HE HELD TALKS WITH THAT
COUNTRY'S PRESIDENT AND HIS
CHIEF RIVAL IN NEXT MONTH'S
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS THERE.
AS THOSE TALKS WERE OCCURRING,
BOKO HARAM ISLAMIC MILITANTS
LAUNCHED NEW ATTACKS ON
MAIDUGURI, ONE OF NIGERIA'S
MAJOR CITIES IN THE NORTH OF THE
COUNTRY.
ACCORDING TO THE COUNCIL ON
FOREIGN RELATIONS HERE IN NEW
YORK, THE MILITANTS HAVE KILLED
8,000 NIGERIANS SINCE 2011.
IN ISRAEL TODAY, PRIME MINISTER
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU DEFENDED HIS
DECISION TO ADDRESS THE U.S.
CONGRESS IN MARCH, EVEN THOUGH
HIS INVITATION TO SPEAK WAS
EXTENDED BY HOUSE SPEAKER JOHN
BOEHNER WITHOUT WHITE HOUSE
KNOWLEDGE, AN ACT SOME HAVE
CRITICIZED AS A BREACH OF
PROTOCOL.
>> (translated): IN COMING
WEEKS, WORLD POWERS ARE LIABLE
TO REACH A FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT
WITH IRAN, THAT COULD LEAVE IRAN
AS A NUCLEAR THRESHOLD STATE,
SOMETHING THAT WOULD CHIEFLY
IMPERIL THE EXISTENCE OF THE
STATE OF ISRAEL.
I WILL GO ANYWHERE I AM INVITED
TO MAKE ISRAEL'S CASE AND DEFEND
ITS FUTURE AND EXISTENCE.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT AN ISRAELI
OPPOSITION LEADER, TZIPI LIVNI,
CRITICIZED NETANYAHU'S DECISION
TO MAKE THE VISIT.
>> YOUR JOB AS PRIME MINISTER IS
TO WORK WITH AMERICAN
PRESIDENTS.
THEY ARE THE ONES WHO MAKE THE
DECISIONS.
THEY ARE THE ONES WHO STAND BY
US, WHETHER THEY ARE REPUBLICANS
OR DEMOCRATS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHITE HOUSE
CHIEF OF STAFF DENIS McDONOUGH
INSISTED TODAY THAT PRESIDENT
OBAMA'S DECISION NOT TO MEET
WITH NETANYAHU WHILE HE IS
WASHINGTON IS NOT INDICATIVE OF
A RIFT BETWEEN THE TWO LEADERS,
JUST A MATTER OF THE VISIT
OCCURRING SHORTLY BEFORE ISRAELI
PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS.
>> WE OUGHT NOT GET INVOLVED IN
THEIR POLITICS.
THAT'S WHY THE PRESIDENT THINK
IT DOESN'T MAKE ANY SENSE FOR US
TO MEET WITH THE PRIME MINISTER
TWO WEEKS BEFORE HIS ELECTION.
>> Sreenivasan: THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION SAID TODAY THAT
IT WANTS ABOUT 1.4 MILLION ACRES
OF THE ARCTIC NATIONAL WILDLIFE
REFUGE DESIGNATED AS WILDERNESS,
A MOVE THAT WOULD RESTRICT OIL
AND GAS DRILLING IN THE AREA.
THE DECISION WAS IMMEDIATELY
DENOUNCED BY ALASKA REPUBLICAN
SENATOR LISA MURKOWSKI WHO
CALLED IT, QUOTING NOW, "A
STUNNING ATTACK ON OUR
SOVEREIGNTY" THAT WOULD DO
ECONOMIC HARM TO THE STATE.
ALASKA'S GOVERNOR, INDEPENDENT
BILL WALKER, SAID OIL AND GAS
DEVELOPMENT ON STATE LANDS MIGHT
ACCELERATE TO COMPENSATE FOR THE
NEW FEDERAL RESTRICTIONS.
THE FEDERAL AVIATION
ADMINISTRATION HAS WARNED
COMMERCIAL AIRLINES THAT
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES MAY POSE A
FIRE HAZARD.
IT WANTS THEM PUT ONLY IN CARRY-
ON LUGGAGE, NOT IN CHECKED BAGS,
BECAUSE A FIRE ON BOARD CAN BE
EXTINGUISHED MORE QUICKLY THAN A
FIRE IN THE CARGO HOLD.
E-CIGARETTES HAVE BEEN LINKED TO
AT LEAST TWO FIRES SINCE AUGUST-
- ONE ON A PLANE; ANOTHER IN AN
AIRPORT BAGGAGE AREA.
A TRADE GROUP REPRESENTING THE
AIRLINES SAID IT IS CLOSELY
REVIEWING THE FAA SAFETY ALERT.
THE IMPACT OF TODAY'S VOTE IN
GREECE IS LIKELY TO AFFECT
PEOPLE AROUND THE WORLD.
TO HELP UNDERSTAND HOW, WE ARE
JOINED NOW BY JOHN AUTHERS.
HE IS THE SENIOR INVESTMENT
COLUMNIST FOR THE "FINANCIAL
TIMES."
WHAT DOES IT MEAN IF THE
PARTY TAKES CONTROL OF
PARLIAMENT, WHETHER IT'S AN
ABSOLUTE MAJORITY OR NOT?
>> IT MEANS THEY NOW HAVE A
MANDATE TO DO WHAT THEY HAVE
BEEN THREATENING TO DO FOR
SEVERAL YEARS, WHICH IS
ATTEMPT TO RENEGOTIATE THE
TERMS OF THE BAILOUT IN
WHICH THEY RECEIVED FROM THE
EUROPEAN UNION SOME YEARS
AGO.
PLAINLY THAT THEN OPENS THE
ISSUE AS THEY FAILED TO
NEGOTIATE NEW TERMS THAT
THEY LEAVE THE YOUR OZONE
INPUT THERE IS NO QUESTION.
>> Sreenivasan: AND HOW DOES
THE EU FEEL ABOUT
RENEGOTIATING A BAILOUT THAT
THEY BEGRUDGINGLY ACCEPTED A
FEW YEARS AGO AND HAVE HAD
TO MAKE MODIFICATIONS FOR
OVER THE LAST FEW YEARS.
>> MARKEDLY, UNENTHUSIASTIC,
AS YOU WHAT EXPECT.
THE LINE THAT CAME ACROSS TO
"THE FINANCIAL TIMES"
REPORTERS IN DAVOS IS A
FAIRLY CLEAR ONE THAT THEY
HAVE DONE ENOUGH FOR THE
GREEKS, THE GREEKS MAY STILL
HAVE 175% OF GDP OF THEIR
OVERHANGING DEBT.
THE OTHER EUROPEANS SAY WE
HAVE STILL GIVEN THEM A LOT
OF GENEROSITY ALREADY.
WE HAVE NEGOTIATED SETDOWN,
WE HAVE EXTENDED THE TERMS.
IT LOOKS AS THOUGH THERE
WOULD BE A LINE IN THE SANDS
WHEN IT CAME TO WHAT IS
KNOWN AS A HAIRCUT TO
REDUCING THE AMOUNT OF DEBT
OUTSTANDING.
AND THERE WILL BE A LOT OF
WIGGLE ROOM IN TERMS OF
EXTENDING THE DEBT IN THE
FUTURE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT IF THE
EU SAYS FINE, WE'LL GIVE YOU
THIS HAIRCUT BUT THEN YOU
HAVE TO LEAVE.
THERE ARE MEMBERS IN THE NEW
PARTY THAT SAY WE SHOULD
LEAVE THE EU ALL TOGETHER.
EITHER WAY IT IS A
PRECEDENT.
>> YES, IT IS.
PLAINLY THE BRIEFINGS AGAIN,
THE BELIEF OUT THERE AT THE
PRESENT IS THAT THAT WOULD
BE JUST ABOUT SURVIVABLE.
IF YOU LOOK AT HOW THE BOND
MARKETS HAVE BEHAVED IN THE
LAST YEAR OR SO, BACK THERE
2010 WHEN THE GREEK CRISIS
FIRST BLEW UP, WE NOW SEE
THAT THE SPANISH DEBT AND
ITALIAN DEBT IS ALMOST NO
RISK OF LEAVING THE EURO, NO
RISK OF DEFAULTS.
TWO AND A HALF YEARS AGO,
THE LAST GREEK ELECTIONS,
THEY WERE SIGNALING REAL
PANIC OVER THE POSSIBILITY
THAT THAT COULD HAPPEN.
SO THERE IS A BELIEF THAT
THE REST OF THE EURO ZONE
CAN CARRY ON.
BUT THE CRITICAL THING IS
THERE NO SO PRECEDENCE OF
THIS UP UNTIL NOW.
THE WHOLE POINT OF THE
EUROZONE IS THAT YOU ARE SO
TOTALLY COMMITTED TO THIS
CURRENCY THAT THERE IS NO
WAY YOU CAN LEAVE.
>> Sreenivasan: RIGHT.
>> ONCE ONE COUNTRY HAS LEFT,
IT BECOMES FAR MORE POSSIBLE
FOR OTHERS TO LEAVE.
>> Sreenivasan: BEFORE THAT
DEPARTURE POINT, DOES IT
EMBOLDEN MORE PARTIES ON THE
FAR LEFT IN OTHER COUNTRIES?
>> ALMOST CERTAINLY.
I MEAN THE MERE FACT THAT
THIS LOOKS AS THOUGH WE HAVE
FINALLY GOT TO THE POINT
WHERE ONE OF THE POPULIST
ALTERNATIVE PARTIES HAS
ACTUALLY MANAGED TO TAKE 30
WE ARE-- POWER, WE'VE SEEN
THE REJECTION OF THE
INCUMBENT PARTIES IN ALL THE
CRISIS-HIT COUNTRIES SINCE
THE CRISIS TOOK HOLD.
BUT THIS IS THE FIRST TIME
ONE OF THE TRULY NEW WAVE
POPULIST PARTIES HAVE TAKEN
HOLD.
THAT WILL EMBOLDEN THE NEW
LEFT-WING ALTERNATIVE
PARTIES ELSEWHERE VERY MUCH.
OBVIOUSLY, A LOT DEPENDS ON
HOW MUCH THEY MANAGE TO DO
WITH THE OPPORTUNITY.
>> Sreenivasan: SO WHAT
HAPPENS TO THE FINANCIAL
MARKETS AROUND THE WORLD.
HAS THIS UNCERTAINTY ALREADY
BAKED IN OR ARE WE LIKELY TO
SEE MORE VOLATILITY?
>> MY SUSPICION IS THAT THIS
WILL PROBABLY CAUSE SOME
CONCERN IN THE MORNING
SIMPLY BECAUSE THEY HAVE
DONE EVEN BETTER THAN THE
MORE OPTIMISTIC PROJECTIONS
AS TIME WENT ON.
THAT SAID, WE ARE-- AT A
POSITION NOW WHERE A LARGE
NUMBER OF THE OTHER
COUNTRIES WHICH WOULD SUFFER
FROM CONTAGION HAVE HAD MUCH
LOWER RATES AT WHICH TO
BORROW FOR QUITE A WHILE.
THEY'VE BEEN ABLE TO DEFEND
THEMSELVES QUITE NICELY
AGAINST THIS SITUATION.
YES, VOLATILITY WILL
INCREASE.
THIS WILL WORRY PEOPLE UNTIL
SUCH A POINT AS NEGOTIATIONS
EMPHATICALLY BREAK DOWN OR
THE GREEKS ACTUALLY GO
THROUGH WITH A DEFAULT.
AT WHICH POINT THAT'S A VERY
SERIOUS EVENT.
ARGUABLY NOT A LEHMAN
BROTHERS EVENT, BUT A
SERIOUS EVENT.
UNTIL SUCH A POINT I THINK
IT JUST MEANS PEOPLE GET A
LITTLE BIT MORE NERVOUS.
I DOUBT THERE WOULD BE ANY
MAJOR IMPACT ON THE MARKET.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
JOHN AUTHERS OF "THE FINANCIAL
TIMES" THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: AS WE MENTIONED
EARLIER, PRESIDENT OBAMA IS IN
INDIA FOR TALKS WITH PRIME
MINISTER NARENDRA MODI.
MODI WAS ELECTED LAST MAY AFTER
PROMISING AN AMBITIOUS PROGRAM
TO MODERNIZE THAT NATION'S
ECONOMY.
BEFORE BECOMING PRIME MINISTER,
MODI LED THE STATE OF GUJARAT IN
WESTERN INDIA FOR MORE THAN A
DECADE.
RECENTLY, SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
FRED DE SAM LAZARO TRAVELED
THERE TO SEE HOW THAT AREA IS
FARING.
FRED'S REPORTING IS A
PARTNERSHIP WITH THE UNDER-TOLD
STORIES PROJECT AT ST.
MARY'S UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA.
>> Reporter: GUJARAT WAS THE
HOME OF MAHATMA GANDHI.
THOUSANDS COME TO PAY HOMAGE--
THE ORDINARY AND THE FAMOUS.
THIS VIDEO IS FROM THE YOUTUBE
CHANNEL OF INDIA'S NEW LEADER AS
HE HOSTED CHINA'S PRESIDENT AT
GANDHI'S ASHRAM.
NARENDRA MODI INVOKES THE FATHER
OF MODERN INDIA, WHO PREACHED
NON-VIOLENCE AND SIMPLE LIVING.
BUT MODI'S VISION SEEMS IN MANY
WAYS MORE LIKE MODERN CHINA.
SO THIS IS SORT OF SHANGHAI-
INSPIRED?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
>> Reporter: THIS IS THE SCALE
MODEL OF AN ALL NEW CITY BEING
BUILT IN GUJARAT FROM SCRATCH.
IT WAS CHAMPIONED BY MODI WHEN
HE HEADED THE STATE GOVERNMENT
HERE.
SO THIS IS WHAT WE'LL COME BACK
TO IN ABOUT A DECADE?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: RAMAKANT JHA WHO
HEADS A AGENCY SET UP TO DEVELOP
IT SAYS IN A DECADE 500,000
PEOPLE WILL WORK IN THE NEW
CITY.
HE SAYS IT WILL KEEP IN THE
COUNTRY SOME $50 BILLION THAT
NOW GOES ELSEWHERE BECAUSE INDIA
LACKS SUCH FACILITIES.
>> ALL THIS INDIAN BUSINESS ARE
BEING PERFORMED IN OTHER
COUNTRIES: SINGAPORE, DUBAI,
LONDON.
>> Reporter: THE MULTINATIONAL
FINANCE AND INSURANCE FIRMS WILL
COME TO GUJARAT, HE PREDICTS, AS
MANY MANUFACTURERS HAVE IN
RECENT YEARS.
THE JAPANESE COMPANY HITACHI IS
ONE.
HITACHI'S VINAY CHAUHAN SAYS
IT'S TEDIOUS TO DO BUSINESS IN
INDIA WITH MYRIAD PERMITS AND
CORRUPTION.
BUT NOT SO IN GUJARAT, HE SAYS,
WHERE MODI CUT RED TAPE AND
IMPROVED THE INFRASTRUCTURE.
>> ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT IS
POWER.
WE HAVE UNINTERRUPTED POWER.
THESE GOVERNMENTS TALK BUT DON'T
DO.
IN GUJARAT NOBODY TALKS, IT IS
JUST DONE.
>> Reporter: UNDER MODI'S
LEADERSHIP, GUJARAT MADE LAND
AVAILABLE FOR FACTORIES AND
REDEVELOPMENT.
ONE SHOWCASED PROJECT IS
RIVERFRONT PARK IN GUJARAT'S
LARGEST CITY, AHMEDABAD.
LUXURY HIGH RISE HOMES ARE SOON
TO FOLLOW.
BUT NOT EVERYONE IS PLEASED WITH
MODI'S APPROACH.
CRITICS SAY IT FAVORS BIG
BUSINESS AT THE EXPENSE OF THE
POOR, INCLUDING THOUSANDS WHO
ONCE LIVED IN THIS GENTRIFIED
AREA.
THE FAMILIES LIVING IN THIS
DECREPIT INDUSTRIAL LOCATION SAY
THEY LIVED FOR YEARS ALONG THE
RIVERFRONT WHEN ALL OF A SUDDEN
THEY WERE ABRUPTLY DISPLACED AND
MOVED HERE, GIVEN TINY PLOTS OF
LAND AND NOTHING MORE TO RESTART
THEIR LIVES.
>> (translated): WE ARE JUST
DAY LABORERS, SAID THIS MAN.
THE CITY-- AT LEAST AN HOUR'S
BUS RIDE AWAY-- IS WHERE THE
WORK IS, THEY SAID.
BUT BUS FARE NOW TAKES HALF OF
THEIR MEAGER EARNINGS; AROUND
THREE DOLLARS A DAY.
>> (translated): WE'RE RIGHT
BY A GARBAGE DUMP AND WHEN IT
RAINS THIS PLACE FLOODS AND THE
WATER BRINGS IT ALL IN.
>> THE WATER IS BAD, WE HAVE TO
WALK REALLY FAR TO LATRINES.
WE HAVE A LOT OF DIFFICULTIES.
WE'RE FORCED TO LIVE LIKE
ANIMALS.
>> MODI IS A VERY GOOD SHOWMAN.
HE KNOWS HOW TO PROJECT THINGS.
BUT THAT IS ABOUT ALL.
>> Reporter: SHABNAM HASHMI
FOUNDED A HUMAN RIGHTS GROUP
THAT ADVOCATES FOR MARGINALIZED
COMMUNITIES.
HASHMI SAYS GUJARAT IS NEAR THE
BOTTOM AMONG INDIA'S STATES IN
EDUCATION AND HEALTH CARE.
AND POVERTY ACTUALLY GREW DURING
MODI'S 13 YEARS AT THE HELM, SHE
SAYS.
>> THE GUJARAT MODEL HELPED
MIDDLE CLASSES, AND GUJARAT
MODEL CARED A DAMN ABOUT THE
POOR, ABOUT THE MARGINALIZED
SECTIONS, AND IT IS GOING TO BE
THE SAME ALL OVER INDIA.
>> Reporter: OTHER POLITICIANS
MAY BE CRITICIZED FOR FAVORING
THE WEALTHY OVER THE POOR.
BUT IN MODI'S CASE, THERE'S ALSO
A SECTARIAN DIMENSION.
HE'S LONG BEEN DOGGED BY
ACCUSATIONS HE DID LITTLE TO
STOP PROGRAMS AGAINST GUJARAT'S
IMPOVERISHED MUSLIM MINORITY
BACK IN 2002-- ALLEGATIONS THAT
LED THE U.S. AND U.K. TO BAN HIM
FROM ENTERING THOSE COUNTRIES.
INQUIRIES LATER CLEARED MODI BUT
HE'S STILL HURT BY LONG TIES TO
HINDU NATIONALIST GROUPS-- SOME
WITH VIOLENT PASTS-- WHO WANT
INDIA OFFICIALLY DECLARED A
HINDU NATION.
MODI'S ELECTION HAS EMBOLDENED
THE EXTREMISTS, SAYS HASHMI, WHO
BELONGS TO INDIA'S 14 PERCENT
MUSLIM MINORITY.
>> IN THE LAST SIX MONTHS, THERE
HAVE BEEN MORE THAN 600 COMMUNAL
RIOTS IN THIS COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: COMMUNAL RIOTS.
>> COMMUNAL RIOTS.
600.
>> Reporter: THIS IS BETWEEN
WHAT, HINDUS AND MUSLIMS?
>> YES.
AND I DON'T KNOW HOW LONG
SOMEBODY LIKE ME SHOULD FEEL
SAFE SITTING IN THIS HOME,
FRANKLY.
>> Reporter: WHAT DOES THAT
MEAN?
>> THAT MEANS THAT I HAVE A
MUSLIM NAME.
>> Reporter: SUPPORTERS OF THE
NEW PRIME MINISTER SAY SUCH
FEARS ARE EXAGGERATED.
THEY SAY MODI HAS SPOKEN OUT
AGAINST EXTREMIST RHETORIC AND
ACTIVITY.
>> HE SAID IT IN THE HOUSE OF
PARLIAMENT, THIS IS
UNACCEPTABLE.
THIS CAN'T GO ON.
WE WANT DEVELOPMENT FOR ALL.
>> Reporter: M.J. AKBAR, A
COLUMNIST AND AUTHOR AND HIMSELF
MUSLIM, IS A SPOKESMAN FOR
MODI'S BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY.
>> HE HAS SAID REPEATEDLY, "I
SAID, I WANT TO SEE MUSLIMS IN
INDIA WITH THE QURAN IN ONE
HAND, THEIR HOLY BOOK, BUT WITH
THE COMPUTER IN THE OTHER HAND."
NOW THAT IS TRUE EMPOWERMENT.
JOBS ARE TRUE EMPOWERMENT.
>> Reporter: AS FOR THE GUJARAT
MODEL, AKBAR SAYS, MODI
INHERITED THE CHALLENGES THAT
UNDERLIE ITS POVERTY.
HE SAYS THE VERDICT ON HIS
TENURE COME FROM HIS ELECTION
THREE TIMES IN THE STATE.
>> WE ARE A DEMOCRACY.
PEOPLE WILL VOTE ONLY IF THEIR
LIVES HAVE IMPROVED.
IT'S QUITE SIMPLE.
>> Reporter: I ASKED PEOPLE
DISPLACED FROM THE RIVERSIDE WHO
THEY VOTED FOR IN THE ELECTION.
NO ONE, THEY SAID.
WE LOST OUR ELECTION CARDS WHEN
THEY TOOK OUR HOMES AWAY, AND WE
DON'T HAVE PROPER ADDRESSES,
WHICH ARE REQUIRED TO GET NEW
ONES.
>> (translated): HOW MUCH HAVE
WE BEEN PLEADING?
HOW LONG HAVE WE BEEN WRITING
THEM?
NO ONE HAS LISTENED TO US YET.
>> (translated): WE'VE BEEN
PROMISED HELP FOR A LONG TIME.
WHOEVER GIVES IT TO US, NARENDRA
MODI OR ANYONE ELSE, WE'D BE
VERY THANKFUL.
>> Reporter: AS IN GUJARAT, THE
NEW PRIME MINISTER'S CHALLENGE
WILL BE TO OFFER HOPE TO SOME
400 MILLION PEOPLE WHO LIVE
BELOW INDIA'S POVERTY LINE, THAT
HIS PRO-BUSINESS POLICIES ARE
THEIR BEST PATH OUT OF POVERTY.
FOR MORE ABOUT HOW PRIME
MINISTER MODI SAYS HE WILL
USHER IN INDIA THEY AGE OF
ACHIEVEMENT, VISIT NEWSHOUR.ORG.
>> Sreenivasan: U.S. HEALTH
OFFICIALS SAY THE MEASLES
OUTBREAK THAT BEGAN AT
DISNEYLAND IN SOUTHERN
CALIFORNIA CONTINUES TO RIPPLE
ACROSS THE NATION.
APPROXIMATELY 100 CASES HAVE
BEEN REPORTED SO FAR.
HOW GREAT A RISK DOES IT POSE?
AND WHAT CAN BE DONE TO STOP ITS
SPREAD?
I SPOKE ABOUT THIS YESTERDAY
WITH DOCTOR ANTHONY FAUCI.
HE IS THE DIRECTOR OF THE
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ALLERGY
AND INFECTIOUS DISEASES IN
WASHINGTON.
SO DR. FAUCI,
WE KNOW THAT THERE ARE, WHAT,
20 MILLION MEASLES CASES
AROUND THE WORLD EVERY YEAR.
BUT WHAT DOES A THEME PARK
LIKE A DISNEYLAND DO TO MAKE
SURE THAT THE PARENTS AND
CHILDREN THAT ARE VISITING
FROM THE UNITED STATES OR
FROM OTHER COUNTRIES ARE
SAFE?
>> YOU KNOW, IT REALLY
RELATES TO THE FACT THAT
THIS HAPPENS BECAUSE
CHILDREN ARE NOT VACCINATED.
THE OVERWHELMING NUMBER OF
PEOPLE WHO HAVE GOTTEN
INFECTED, PARTICULARLY AMONG
THE CHILDREN, ARE CHILDREN
THAT HAVE NOT BEEN VACCINATED.
BECAUSE PARENTS FOR REASONS
THAT ARE REALLY NOT BASED ON
ANY SCIENTIFIC DATA, JUST
DON'T WANT THEIR CHILDREN TO
BE VACCINATED.
AND IT'S REALLY UNFORTUNATE,
BECAUSE VACCINATION CAN
PREVENT ALL OF THIS.
ONE OF THE THINGS WE DO KNOW
ABOUT MEASLES IS THAT THE
VACCINE THAT WE HAVE IS ONE
OF THE MOST EFFECTIVE
VACCINES WE HAVE FOR ANY
VIRAL DISEASE OR FOR ANY
MICROBE-- MICROBE, SO THIS
ALL COULD HAVE BEEN SHUT
DOWN IF PEOPLE HAD GOTTEN
VACCINATED.
THAT IS THE REAL CRITICAL
ISSUE.
>> Sreenivasan: IN
2000-- 2000 WE DECLARED
MEASLES WAS ELIMINATED THAT
IS NOT ACTIVE DISEASE
TRANSMISSIONS.
AND WHEN YOU LOOK AT THE
NUMBERS BETWEEN 2001 AND
2013 WE HAD AN AVERAGE OF --
8 CASES A YEAR.
AND LAST YEAR, WE HAD 6-- 88
CASE-- 88 CASES A AREA AND
LAST YEAR 644.
THAT IS AN ENORMOUS LEAP.
>> IT IS, THERE WERE 20
SEPARATE OUTBREAKS IN THE
YEAR 2014 AS YOU MENTIONED,
644 CASES, THAT JUST SHOULD
NOT HAVE HAPPENED.
PEOPLE DON'T FULLY
APPRECIATE THAT MEASLES IS
NOT A TRIVIAL DISEASE.
IT CAN BE TRULY A VERY
SERIOUS DISEASE.
PRIOR TO THE AVAILABILITY OF
VACCINATIONS, WE HAD ABOUT
500,000 CASES IN THE UNITED
STATES AND AN AVERAGE OF
ABOUT 500 DEATHS PER YEAR.
THAT WAS ESSENTIALLY AS YOU
MENTIONED, AGAIN CORRECTLY,
ESSENTIALLY ELIMINATED
BECAUSE WE WERE
MEASLES-FREE.
AND THEN BECAUSE OF THE
MOVEMENT OF ANTI-VACCINATION
MOVEMENT AND CHILDREN NOT
GETTING VACCINATED,
PARTICULARLY WHEN IT IS
CONCENTRATED IN CERTAIN
AREAS WHERE THERE ARE A
HIGHER PERCENTAGE IN CERTAIN
PARTS OF THE COUNTRY, THAT
REALLY LEADS TO THAT GROUP
AND CLUSTER.
SO THAT WHEN YOU HAVE AN
INTRODUCTION OF MEASLES,
WHEREVER IT MAY BE, IT COULD
BE IN A RECREATIONAL PARK OR
SOMEPLACE ELSEWHERE PEOPLE
CONGREGATE, IF YOU HAVE A
CERTAIN PERCENTAGE OF THE
CHILDREN OR OF ANYONE WHO
ARE NOT PROTECTED AGAINST
MEASLES, THAT'S HOW YOU GET
THESE OUTBREAKS WHICH,
UNFORTUNATELY, COULD REALLY
HAVE BEEN COMPLETELY AVOIDED
AND PREVENTED.
>> Sreenivasan: SO AS YOU
MENTIONED THESE CLUSTERS,
EPIDEMIOLOGISTS HAVE STUDIED
THESE PATTERNS.
AND THIS IS SOMETHING THAT
CUTS ACROSS, WHETHER IT'S
CONSERVATIVE OR LIBERAL,
RICH OR POOR.
SO HOW DO YOU DESIGN A
HEALTH POLICY THAT TACKLES
THESE LITTLE CLUSTERS?
>> WELL, WHAT WE HAVE TO DO
IS CONTINUE TO UNDERSCORE
AND EMPHASIZE THE IMPORTANCE
OF VACCINATION.
BUT ALSO TO UNDERSCORE THE
FACT THAT THE REASON FOR NOT
VACCINATING, THIS ISSUE THAT
THE RISK OF A MEASLES
VACCINE IS SO GREAT THAT IT
OVERRIDES THE BENEFIT THAT
YOU COULD GET FROM
PROTECTING YOUR CHILD, IS
JUST NOT TRUE.
BECAUSE THE EVIDENCE THAT
WAS PUT FORTH YEARS AGO
ABOUT VARIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS
ASSOCIATED WITH MEASLES
VACCINATIONS FROM DIFFERENT
TYPES OF DISEASE TO AUTISM
HAVE BEEN COMPLETELY
DISPROVEN BY A NUMBER OF
SCIENTIFIC BODIES,
INDEPENDENT BODIES THAT HAVE
SHOWN THAT.
AND YET THEY STILL CLING AND
REINFORCE EACH OTHER THAT,
IN FACT, MEASLES VACCINES
AND OTHER VACCINES REALLY
SHOULD NOT BE GIVEN BECAUSE
THEY'RE DANGEROUS.
THAT'S JUST UNFORTUNATE.
AND LEADS TO THE KIND OF
THING THAT WE'RE DEALING
WITH RIGHT NOW.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
LET ME PREFACE THIS QUESTION
BY SAYING I'M NOT TRYING TO
SCARE MY AUDIENCE.
BUT I HAVE GOT TO ASK IS
THAT SOME PART OF US IS DUE
TO THE FACT THAT A LOT OF US
DON'T HAVE FIRSTHAND
EXPERIENCE WITH MEASLES.
RIGHT.
SO WHAT IS THE VACCINE
PROTECTING A CHILD FROM?
WHAT ARE THE AFFECTS OF THIS
DISEASE?
>> WELL, MEASLES IS ONE OF
THOSE DISEASES THAT IN AND
OF ITSELF IS SERIOUS BUT CAN
LEAD TO SERIOUS
COMPLICATION.
THE KIND OF CLINICAL
MANIFESTATION, YOU GET A
FEVER, YOU GET AKOFF, YOU
GET RUNNY NOSE, CONJUNCTIVITIS
OR WHAT WE CALL RED EYE.
AND IT REALLY DEBILITATES A
CHILD DURING THAT PERIOD OF
TIME.
A CERTAIN PERCENTAGE OF
CHILDREN GO ON TO
COMPLICATIONS LIKE MIDDLE
EAR INFECTIONS, PNEUMONIA
AND EVEN ENSIEVE LIGHT IS
AND EVEN DEATH.
THAT IS WHY THE DEVELOPMENT
OF MEASLES VACCINATION AND
THE ELIMINATION OF MEASLES
FROM THIS COUNTRY SEVERAL
YEARS AGO UNTIL IT BOUNCED
BACK NOW WITH THESE
OUTBREAKS, WAS REALLY A
TRIUMPH IN MEDICAL PUBLIC
HEALTH ENDEAVOR.
GOOD VACCINATIONS IN SOME
RESPECTS PARADOXICALLY ARE
VICTIMS OF THEIR OWN
SUCCESS.
NOW THAT WE DON'T SEE A LOT
OF MEASLES, THAT SCARE OF
THE DIFFICULTY AND THE
SERIOUSNESS OF IT IS NOT ON
PEOPLE'S RADAR SCREEN.
IT GETS BACK ON THEIR RADAR
SCREEN WHEN YOU SEE WHAT IS
GOING ON RIGHT NOW
THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY.
WHICH COULD BE COMPLETELY
AVOIDABLE IF PEOPLE HAD
VACCINATED THEIR CHILDREN.
>> Sreenivasan: DR. ANTHONY
FAUCI, DIRECTOR OF THE
INSTITUTE OF ALLERGY AND
INFECTIOUS DISEASE, THANK
YOU VERY MUCH.
>> YOU'RE QUITE WELCOME.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU MAY HAVE
SEEN THE CNN DOCUMENTARY
"BLACKFISH" THAT EXAMINED THE
TREATMENT OF KILLER WHALES AT
SEA WORLD ORLANDO.
NOW, AT THE MIAMI SEAQUARIUM,
ANOTHER CONTROVERSY IS BREWING
OVER A WHALE NAMED LOLITA.
THE NATIONAL OCEANIC AND
ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION IS
CURRENTLY DECIDING WHETHER
LOLITA SHOULD BE PLACED ON THE
ENDANGERED SPECIES LIST.
>> IF SHE IS LISTED AS AN
ENDANGERED SPECIES, CITIZENS
WILL THEN HAVE THE RIGHT TO SUE
ON HER BEHALF.
>> Sreenivasan: THAT COULD LEAD
TO LOLITA BEING RE-ACCLIMATED
OVER TIME AND EVENTUALLY
RELEASED BACK INTO THE WATERS
OFF SEATTLE, WHERE SHE WAS
CAPTURED IN 1970.
SOME SCIENTISTS AND ACTIVISTS
ARGUE THAT THE TANK WHERE LOLITA
CURRENTLY LIVES ALONE IS TOO
SMALL FOR HER WELL-BEING AND
THAT SHE SHOULD BE SET FREE.
LOLITA HAS BEEN DUBBED "THE
WORLD'S LONELIEST ORCA."
AND THIS WEEK, HUNDREDS MARCHED
IN MIAMI DEMANDING HER RELEASE.
BUT THE MIAMI SEAQUARIUM SAYS IT
WILL FIGHT ANY PLAN TO PUT
LOLITA BACK INTO THE WILD,
ARGUING THAT SHE SIMPLY CAN'T
SURVIVE ON HER OWN AFTER 45
YEARS IN CAPTIVITY.
ROBERT ROSE, THE CURATOR OF THE
AQUARIUM, NOTES HOW HARD IT IS
FOR AN ANIMAL THAT'S LIVED IN
CAPTIVITY FOR SO LONG TO BE
RETURNED TO THE OPEN OCEAN.
>> I MEAN SHE'S GONNA DIE,
WITHOUT QUESTION.
THEY ARE GOING TO TAKE HER OUT
THERE AND DO EXACTLY THE SAME
THING THEY DID TO KEIKO WHICH IS
TO KILL HIM.
>> Sreenivasan: KEIKO WAS THE
ICONIC KILLER WHALE THAT STARRED
IN THE MOVIE "FREE WILLY."
KEIKO WAS RELEASED INTO THE
WATERS OFF NORWAY IN 2002 BUT
DIED ALONE A YEAR LATER OF
PNEUMONIA.
>> AND UNFORTUNATELY THIS DIDN'T
HAVE THE HOLLYWOOD HAPPY ENDING
WHERE FREE WILLY JUMPED OVER THE
WALL AND LIVED HAPPILY EVER
AFTER.
>> Sreenivasan: NOAA'S DECISION
ON LOLITA'S STATUS IS EXPECTED
BY THE END OF THIS MONTH.
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT,
NEW YORK CITY AND SEVERAL
NORTHEASTERN STATES ARE
BRACING FOR A POTENTIALLY
HISTORIC BLIZZARD.
THIS MAP PROJECTING SNOWFALL
AMOUNTS OF TWO TO THREE FEET
IN THE NEW YORK METROPOLITAN
AREA WAS PUBLISHED THIS
AFTERNOON BY THE NATIONAL
WEATHER SERVICE.
THE SNOWIEST DAY ON RECORD
IN NEW YORK CITY WAS JUST MORE
THAN TWO FEET, 26.9 INCHES IN
FEBRUARY OF 2006.
VERY HEAVY SNOWFALL IS ALSO
EXPECTED IN EASTERN
PENNSYLVANIA, SOUTHERN NEW
JERSEY, CONNECTICUT, RHODE
ISLAND, MASSACHUSETTS, NEW
HAMPSHIRE AND MAINE.
FORECASTERS ARE ALSO WARNING
OF HIGH WINDS AND POTENTIAL
POWER OUTAGES.
THE STORM IS EXPECTED TO BEGIN
TOMORROW NIGHT.
WE'LL HAVE MUCH MORE ABOUT THIS
AND THE REST OF THE NEWS
TOMORROW.
I HOPE YOU'LL JOIN US ON AIR
AND ONLINE.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, HAVE A
GOOD NIGHT.